yes
me
my
m
foreign
um
my
so greetings friends last week
we were discussing the two sutras
pratyaksa
anumana agamahabramanani
that talk about what is called
pramana and vipariya which are the first
two chitta virtis that patanjali is
describing
patanjali further starts to explain what
are the other chittavaritis and the next
one that we are discussing today is
what is called as vikalpa
in some ways the sutra is a bit
controversial in the
what you call as the philosophical
circles when you read many of the
commentaries of yoga sutra philosophy
there is
some philosophical debates surrounding
this sutra
because on the one hand
patanjali is
starting the sutra which says
that means we have to follow
the knowledge that comes from a shabda
the word
we are using a word to express certain
things
but at the same time patanjali also uses
the word vastu shunya
the concept of shunya means an absence
of an object vastus means there is
absence of the object
so certain philosophers they take this
absence of the object literally
meaning that an object does not exist
at all
the object does not exist at all
but at the same time
patanjali is using the word spoti
that means there is
a shabda that describes something
and there is a knowledge that is coming
from shabda
there is great discussion surrounding
this this is what
is the conflict
because on the one hand the vastus
can
imply
that the object does not exist at all
that there is no reality
to that object
certain schools
of philosophy they follow this view
saying that certain objects that are
not perceivable by the senses
they don't exist
for example
the concept of god
god is not existing
because there is no definable form they
say that
this is not existent some schools not
patanjali
so patanjali is here
saying no not necessarily because these
objects may be described through a
certain word
that is what is called shabdagnam
so when we follow the
the knowledge that comes from a word
the mind creates a fantasy about this
object that is normally not perceivable
by the senses
and therefore that becomes imagination
until we have a direct perception
of the same
until we have a direct experience of the
same that becomes an imagination
for example
there are many things in this world
that we are not seeing
objects that are well defined objects
that are very subtle
say for example mount kailash
many people have talked to me about
mount kailash i have never seen this but
people talk about this
now suppose the photographs was not
there people only use words to describe
this
so when they use words to describe it
there is a image that forms in my mind
in the absence of the object because i
don't see that object yet
so
because
the object is not in my field of
perception
there is a a frame that is created in my
mind which says this is mount kailash it
exists like this i imagine that
until
i visit that and i see it directly and
then i have a direct experience then it
becomes pramana until then it's an
imagination that is in my mind of how
something will be
of how something will be
so this is what is defined as vikalpa
this is what is defined as vikalpa
and the vikalpa is following what is
called as
knowledge of the word
this is very important for us to
understand because
the knowledge of the word itself is very
different
for each of us
each of us
we understand words
differently
for example
if somebody's
comes and says
oh
today is a hot day
now what is hot for one person
is not necessarily hot for another
person
so because each word is unique
and therefore
each person's
imagination is unique
nobody imagines
everything the same way
this is also explained further in the
sutra in the third chapter for example
clarification is done about this topic
because
usually shabda
a word or communication has three
components
we have what is called shabda
shabda is the actual sound
a word has a sound it is constructed a
certain way
then there is artha
it represents something
it represents something for example
it represents a meaning it represents an
object etc there is a
a meaning or a representation
but then that representation
also has a very unique
understanding that each of us have
that is what is called pratyaya
patanjali presents this later in the
chapter
says that when we are
using language there are always
different entities that are present
for example shabda is a sound
a certain sound
is produced a certain way
for example
we use the sound in english we
which means a collection of us
we people
we are a group we
whereas in another language like french
we sounds as if it's we yes
so the sound shabda
itself can represent different
arthas
different objects different purposes
now
many years ago when somebody said i want
an apple
it meant they wanted the fruit apple but
nowadays in the computer generation when
somebody says i want an apple
it's not always meaning an apple the
fruit somebody young child may want an
apple as a computer
we don't know what they want so
this is why the word
may
shabda may be similar
but the meanings are
what it represents is different
so when somebody says i want an apple
the person who is saying it is
representing one object
now the person who is hearing in his
mind
he may understand the apple as something
else
so there is
difference in understanding
similarly
even where the word sits inside each of
us what is called pratyaya unique
understanding
suppose we say today is a hot day
now today is a hot day
can mean anything
because for one person hot
may mean
sitting in the beach
sitting some nice apple juice and
relaxing
for somebody else hot day means
going out and playing tennis
for somebody else
a hot day means sweating and sweating
and sweating
where each
this word hot day hot sits in each of us
is different
if i say to each of you
imagine a happy place
now first of all what is happy may be
different for everybody and what is a
place may be different for everybody
somebody may imagine a happy place as a
house a home
somebody may imagine a happy place as
a beach
in the arms of their lover
somebody may imagine happy place as the
presence of their dogs and cats
the meaning
of each word and where it sits inside us
is also different
so that is what is pratyaya our unique
experience of certain concepts certain
realities
so because there are differences in all
of this
each person will create
a certain imagination that is very very
unique
it will not be the same you ask people
to imagine a happy place and describe it
either with words or with a picture or
painting or something
each one will come up with a unique
imagination that is why it is called
vikalpa kalpa means a creation
so imagination is a creation of the mind
means specific
special
it's special to each person
it's specific to each circumstance
so each person imagines something very
specifically very uniquely
and that is what is vikalpa we kalpa is
a specific creation
of the mind
now please remember
that all this is not fixed
between only persons
it's also
changing
as
we grow
in experience even in our life
when you are young
when we say imagine a happy place it
means one thing when you are in the
middle age
when you say imagine a happy place it's
something else
when you are in older age when you say
imagine a happy place it's something
else so even for the same person
the imagination changes because these
words represents
different realities
different experiences different
feelings the word happiness
changes
as we grow
the word hot changes as we grow as we
grow in life if we are well traveled we
travel to many
places so what may have been hot
when we were younger when we didn't
travel is very different from what is
hot when we have traveled and we have
experienced
different places
so this also changes in each of our
lifetime that's why
an imagination is always unique
to that moment of imagination
to that moment of imagination it is not
fixed
forever
that's why it is called vikalpa
and always the vikalpa is in the absence
of the object which means the object is
not in the direct
field of perception
it is not in the direct field of
perception
this means
that we are not able to see that object
directly does not mean that the object
does not exist
for example we all have
a
heart but we cannot see the heart
because it's an organ that is inside us
so we have to only imagine how the heart
is when we say oh please connect with
your heart
we say visualize the heart it's an
imagination
because we really cannot see the heart
it doesn't mean there is vastu shunya it
doesn't mean the heart does not exist
because if that was the case you will
not exist
so that is why we have to understand
this vastu shunya in a
very
metaphoric concept that the vastu the
object
is not present in the field of
perception
because if the vastu is in the field of
perception we don't need imagination
there is pratyaksha
there is direct perception that is
possible when something is in front of
our eyes why do we need to imagine
if we are imagining when something is in
front of our eyes
something is wrong
it means the senses are not working
so same idea
that this senses are not
seeing the object or the object is not
in the field of perception
for example if somebody is blind or you
have to close your eyes and see somebody
objects become
invisible to the perception
therefore you have to imagine
because the objects are not in the field
of perception it doesn't mean they don't
exist if i close my eyes
it doesn't mean that you disappear that
you are not there
it only means that you are not in the
field of my visual perception so i have
to imagine who is there what who is
where etc
that is the creation of the mind that is
what is vikalpa
now vikalpa
is very useful vikalpa is very dangerous
sometimes depending on what we imagine
it can be krishta and akrishta
as patanjali said earlier
um
can be both krishta and akrishta
if we imagine
something that is positive
that is useful
then the vapor ayah beca vikalpa becomes
useful
imagination becomes useful
but we can also imagine things that are
not useful
for example some people always imagine
that somebody wants to attack them
somebody wants to attack them somebody
wants to attack them it may not be real
but this is their imagination
that becomes negative and it becomes it
creates more fear
because makes it more negative toxic
whereas if somebody
is imagining that okay i will be helped
there is somebody always helping me
there is somebody always taking care of
me
this becomes atleast it's not hurtful
it's sometimes
refreshing it's sometimes
more supportive
so vikalpa can also be useful or
dangerous
many scientific
discoveries
many inventions etc
often started with vikalpa and then it
became a reality
it is also why it's called vikalpa
because
these that we create in our mind they
become a reality at some point
they become a reality at some point if
you look at some of the great inventions
for example some great artists
in the 15th century
already imagined that some machines will
fly
now there were no machines that flew at
this time but they imagine
that the machines will fly
now that became a reality many centuries
later because somebody imagined that
somebody
created that possibility and that became
a reality that is why vikalpa
often leads to kalpa creation the word
kalpan means to create
something becomes created
so that's why we should be very careful
what we imagine
because whatever we imagine it's
possible that it becomes a reality
maybe maybe not in our lifetime
maybe in our lifetime if we keep
imagining somebody will hurt us somebody
will harm us all the time it's possible
that this pattern becomes a samskara and
we are drawn
towards circumstances that will anyway
hurt us
whereas if we imagine that somebody is
always helping us somebody is always
kind to us even if it's not there
maybe there will be some energy some
pattern that we are creating that will
draw us to circumstances
that will
help us get help
so that is why vikalpa is very important
for us because what we imagine
has the capacity to become a reality
this is very very important also because
in the field of yoga practice for
example
when we talk about meditation when we
say we have to meditate on an object
when we have to meditate on this or that
usually we start with imagination
we start with vikalpa we imagine that
object
then
the imagination vikalpa leads to bhavana
visualization
bhavana will lead to dhyanam
we are not going to start with
meditation
meditation is an experience that happens
it it's something that is a siddhi it's
a result
whereas the result of meditation does
not happen like that
it has to have the consequence result
means something has to be done before so
meditation's precursory step is usually
visualization
visualizations
precursor is vikalpa this is how vikalpa
can be
atleast can be useful
when it can serve
us towards the direction of meditation
when it's not serving in the direction
of meditation vikalpa is not useful for
us it only creates more problem
you can also imagine negative things
for example the world's greatest weapons
have also been created because somebody
imagined that
so it can be negatively used as well
similarly the world's greatest
inventions for health and healing also
came from visualization at some point
so the the consequences of vikalpa
can be either way
that is why patanjali says krishta or
akrishta
so this is a very important aspect of
vikalpa which is
that vikalpa can be useful or hurtful
depending on how we use it
and very often vikalpa is part of our
perception
there is a concept that is presented in
the yoga sutra
which says that usually when we are
perceiving people when we are perceiving
objects when we are perceiving this
world
we are having perceiving it through what
is called as a created perception
patanjali talks about it also in the
third chapter
created perception
which is a combination of
memory
and imagination
and imagination it's a combination of
all this
now whether it is pramana or vapariya
also is there there is sometimes pramana
sometimes when you look at somebody or
something we look at a person we don't
know everything about the person we have
some memory of that person from the past
we have some memory
then we have some
pratyaksha as well we are observing the
person using our senses
then we start imagining also
today this person is looking a bit dull
we can observe through the senses that
the person is looking a bit dull or
tired
we are also imagining something oh maybe
this person had a problem before she
came
oh maybe she's not happy with me
maybe she doesn't like me
maybe she doesn't like this place we
start imagining things also
so vikalpa also plays a role in what is
called kalpita virti when we are
interacting with people
we are not interacting always with
pramana
always with vipariyah
always with memory
always with imagination we are actually
interacting with people
based on a created perception which
includes all these contributing factors
which includes all these contributing
factors and it creates this reality
which is subjective
so that is why
vikalpa has a strong role in perception
for example when you go to a
restaurant
and it's totally new
you don't know this country it's a new
restaurant
you have new food
and they bring you some food
you have never seen this before
but your mind is not just observing it
and taking as it is
it's always trying to imagine oh it's
like
what you know already
for example
many times when we go to indian
restaurant
outside of india
and they have something called the vada
now maybe in europe people don't know
what is vada
so they say salty donut
because maybe people know what is a
donut so they try to create an
imagination for people to have salty
donut doughnut doughnut never exists
in a salty manner usually not it's
usually sweet
but they want to give you an imagination
so through these words
you imagine this
suppose donut shop comes to chennai to
india
and we don't know what is donut they may
say sweet vada
so they are trying to give us an
impression of what is this imagination
so
when we are perceiving
we are not usually taking things as it
is
we are always creating a fantasy
we are always creating a fantasy that is
a contributing part
to what we are observing as well
that is what is called kalpita vrati
created perception which is based on
combination of all this memory that's
why we are able to make associations
memory and vikalpa are two strong
entities here plus our sensory
observations
what we see through the senses
which may be right which may be wrong
pramana or vipariya it may be right may
be wrong
so there may be contributing elements of
which smriti and vikalpa are very strong
that is what patanjali says later when
you remove
all these
influences of memory imagination
projections etc from perception
the light the the the envelope that
covers the light is removed
because sometimes this imagination
is a barrier
to
proper perception
suppose i have to
do
a one-to-one meeting with somebody
and if i'm always imagining looks a
little bit dull
and i'm imagining he or she does not
like me
it's a barrier it's an obstacle for my
relationship with that person
in that professional context
the opposite as well
suppose i imagine that they like me very
much
it may not be the reality they don't
like it but i'm acting as if they like
it so i am doing too much
this also is not useful
so that's why patanjali later says
sometimes it's important to remove
projections of memory and imagination so
that you see things as they are clearly
but until such a moment you have to
accept that imagination is a very strong
part in our perception that is what is
called kal pitavrti
and patanjali says there are
kalpitavriti that can be of different
types bahira kalpita
externally created perception or
internally created perception
sometimes people give us their opinions
so suppose i want to meet you
now my friend tells me you are a bad
person
so i am coming to this meeting with the
imagination that i am going to meet a
bad person
i'm going to meet a difficult person
so there's an external
projection that is coming that is making
me imagine
that you are a bad person you are a bad
person
but there can also be an
internal
projection suppose
you say oh my name is so and so
now
your name
is the same name
as let us say one of my school teacher
who traumatized me
so immediately i imagine you're also the
same person you are a bad person you
will also cause trauma for me
that projection is coming from my past
from my inside
and i can imagine
that you are a bad person because of
this association
so this kind of projected
reality can come from external
influences
or internal influences but there is a
strong presence strong influence
of
memory
and imagination memory and imagination
are very close friends
very often we imagine things
through
what we already have a memory of
very often when you meet people
and you are trying to understand the
persons you're always trying to imagine
oh this person is like that person i
know
that's memories influence of imagination
oh he's she's like that he's like that
we imagine this so memory and
imagination are very strong friends and
that is why patanjali calls this as a
kalpita virti which is based very
strongly on
memory and imagination this is very
important for us to remember
because usually the chittavritis do not
exist
independently it's very rare
it's very rare that they exist
independently
so
that is why
this concept of
imagination is also important for us to
understand because it is a very strong
part of our daily activities
it's difficult to imagine a state of
interaction in daily life without
imagination
that is so st that is why vikalpa is so
strong and so important
so that is why patanjali defines this
concept of
vikalpas shabda
foreign
you